---
layout: post
title: Book review - Flow The Psychology of Optimal Experience
description: 
date: '2019-10-15'
tags: books
draft: true
---

Can optimal experience be defined in concrete terms ? Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi in his book `Flow` The Psychology of Optimal Experience tries to do just that.

## Review


Optimal experience also called here `flow` is something we all experienced. It's the moment when feel in control of our actions, masters of our own
fate, feel a sense of euphoria, a deep sense of enjoyment that is long cherished and that becomes a life lasting memory. 


The book tries to give some general principles, along with concrete examples of how some people have used these principles, to transform boring and meaningless lives into ones full of enjoyment. The information presented in the book is based on psychological research an result of experiments.


**About flow ...**


Moments like these, the best moments in our lives, are usually not the passive, receptive, relaxing although such experiences can also be enjoyable, if we have worked hard to attain them. The best moments usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something difficult and worthwhile. Such experiences are not necessarily pleasant at the time they occur. 
Optimal experience is thus something that we make happen.


**Characterizing flow ...**

*A Challenging Activity That Requires Skills*
The first feature is that it requires a level of skill. The balance between skill and challenge has to be just right. Too high skill leads to boredom, too high challenge leads to anxiety, enjoyment appears at the boundary between the two, when the challenges are just balanced one's capacity to act.


*The Merging of Action and Awareness*
The second feature is being completely absorbed by the activity to the point when the persons stop being aware of themselves as separate from the actions they are performing. 


*Clear Goals and Feedback*
Third feature relates to goal and feedback. Feedback has to be logically related to the goal in which one invested energy. What makes feedback valuable is the symbolic message it contains: that I have succeeded in my goal. Such knowledge creates order in consciousness, and strengthens the structure of the self.


*Concentration on the Task at Hand*
Forth feature is being able to forget all the unpleasant aspects of life. This is an important by-product of the fact that enjoyable activities require a complete focusing of attention on the task at hand—thus leaving no room in the mind for irrelevant information.


*The Paradox of Control*
“A strong relaxation and calmness comes over me. I have no worries of failure. What a powerful and warm feeling it is! I

*The Loss of Self-Consciousness*
We have seen earlier that when an activity is thoroughly engrossing, there is not enough attention left over to allow a person to consider either
the past or the future, or any other temporarily irrelevant stimuli. One item that disappears from awareness deserves special mention, because in normal
life we spend so much time thinking about it: our own self. Here is a climber describing this aspect of the experience: “It’s a Zen feeling, like meditation
or concentration. One thing you’re after is the one-pointedness of mind.

*The Transformation of Time*



**Conditions for flow**

Page 74 - screenshot

Getting control of life is never easy, and sometimes it can be
definitely painful. But in the long run optimal experiences add up to a sense
of mastery—or perhaps better, a sense of participation in determining the
content of life—that comes as close to what is usually meant by happiness
as anything else we can conceivably imagine.


**Tips to improve...**

THE AUTOTELIC SELF: A SUMMARY - p 208



**Special note on the body** 
When we are unhappy, depressed, or bored we have an easy remedy

at hand: to use the body for all it is worth. Most people nowadays are aware
of the importance of health and physical fitness. But the almost unlimited
potential for enjoyment that the body offers often remains unexploited.


cultivate focus to improve autotelic experience 
THE ULTIMATE CONTROL: YOGA AND
THE MARTIAL ARTS
When it comes to learning to control the body and its experiences, we are
as children compared to the great Eastern civilizations.




The Challenge of Lifelong Learning
